---
layout: post
title: "Abyss"
date: 2022-08-21
categories: [essay, creative writing]
---
You need motivation to succeed in any competitive discipline. To train, you need motivation. To perform at you very best on competition day, you need motivation. To recover after the most grievous of failures and continue improving your skills, you need motivation. But it is unseen and unpredictable just as it is important. You and I often don't see how powerful motivation is until that big day comes. Until you found yourself walking into that football stadium, that basketball gym, that exam hall. You looked around at everyone else and realized just how much more motivated they were than you. How badly they wanted to win that championship. And then you looked at yourself. Pitifully. The only person who wasted away all the time they had to prepare. Who tried to avoid that harsh reality by wasting even more time.

Well, I was 'you'. That basketball gym I was talking about? Yeah, I played there. 2012 State Championships. Was in my junior year back then, perfectly balanced between explosive and experienced. Months before, the scouts had put me up as a 4 star recruit. I had the audacity to joke about being an NBA legend someday. So I rarely practiced, having little motivation to even touch a basketball. And people were still hyping me up so much for the games, I thought I was invincible. But stepping onto that court, I knew something was wrong. The roar of the crowd passed right through me. Like I was scared of it. Almost as if I dreaded playing against opponents who I had never feared before.

I don't know how we even went that far into the competition. My shooting was off point, my passing horrendous, and I scored a career high in turnovers during semi finals. But my teammates pushed through. As they mustered the strength to score basket after basket, I saw the sweat on their brows. The same sweat you could see when they were training day and night for this. But while they were practicing, I was partying. Skipping practice became a regular thing for me. Sometimes I told them I was injured, having a sore arm or a pulled hamstring. Other times I didn't provide any reason. Well, I just wasn't motivated enough to show up. The allure of instant gratification seemed to trump healthy habits. While my teammates were eating chicken and salad, I was gorging myself on Oreos. While my teammates ran 10 miles a day, I ran none. While my teammates played practice games, I played Call of Duty. On the days that I did show up to practice, you could clearly see the compounding effects of my horrible lifestyle. I was becoming out of shape, and was slowly losing my 'magical' ability to score shot after shot. So many times, coach pulled me aside and tried to get me to explain. But I would not; the only person at fault was myself.

"It's fine," I thought, "now that we're in the finals." It was not. The entire team was losing strength and hope. We barely won the semis - by a last second game winner. There was not a time in the series when they needed me more. All they needed is for me to play how I used to, and the glorious title was within reach. And I'm pretty sure they didn't get that. Right from the first quarter, we already knew we were losing. It became a 10 point deficit, then 20, then 30. At some point during the first half, I lost motivation for the game. Every time we played aggressive to pay back our debt, they punished us for our poor defense. Once we started playing defense to try and stop them from scoring, they smirked and wasted time. At half time, coach subbed me out of frustration. He told me I that I had enough chances. That my shots bounced useless off the rim; that my rebounding was nonexistent; that I always fumbled the ball. My teammates were yelling, practically begging me to do something about it. The cacophany of voices, the flurry of insults, I couldn't take it anymore. And then I snapped.

I put on my hoodie and stormed right out the locker room. Tuned out those voices. To this day, I don't remember what they said to me. Whether there was silence or chaos. I don't care to remember.

For the rest of high school I sunk deeper into the abyss. Judging from the lack of celebration, we didn't win the title. Coach and I didn't talk much. He gave me one last chance to rejoin the team and redeem myself, but I said no. I had zero motivation for basketball. One by one, my basketball dreams faded away. The scouts downgraded me to 2 stars, and then to none. My team moved on and forgot about me. I was horribly out of shape. Got no offers from even the worst of colleges. Returned to those bad habits. 

After high school, I tried to forget about the tragedy of it all. Started a new life for myself to numb the pain of those memories. I work as a librarian now, any sports-related career just brought back those scarring flashbacks. But sometimes, during the monotonicity of sorting and searching literature, I think back to those glory days. The screeching of shoes moving on the court. The cutting passes. The splashing sound as the ball flew right through the net. But because of my laziness, happy memories turned into sad ones. You know, many kids visit the library. I always tell them to stay motivated - so that they can live the dream life that I could not.

*Based on a true story*